---
layout: post
title: "Medusa: Large Format Laser Cutter"
date: 2024-12-01 16:30:00 -0600
categories: Projects Tools
---

The ability of a CO2 laser to efficiently turn sheets of plastic into functional parts is practically unrivaled in the world of rapid prototyping.

<!--TODO: add picture of assembly-->

I first experienced the magic of a laser cutter in high school when my robotics team got access to one in a makerspace. In college, nearly 24 hour access enabled many more projects.
Ever since graduation I've been going through a laser withdrawl, trying to fit my projects into short windows of availability at the local makerspace, [BLDG61](https://boulderlibrary.org/makerspaces/).

But now is a time for change, a time to make the CO2 laser a standard tool for myself once again.

<!--more-->

## Objectives

There are really only a few things laser cutters are good at: cutting 2d shapes out of sheet stock and engraving or marking on flat surfaces.

While I will likely engrave some markings into my projects, my primary desire is to make functional parts for robotics, rocketry, electronics enclosures, and any other miscellaneous projects that come my way.

To effectively process sheet stock, I need at least a 2 foot by 2 foot cutting area, though the ability to handle much larger projects (up to a 48" wide piece of plywood) is certainly a plus. My solution is a 24 x 48 inch cutting area with provisions to allow larger sheets to pass through the front and back of the machine to be cut in multiple steps.

- 24" x 48" work area (48" x infinite with passthrough)
- 40W nominal power (accepts upgrade to 120W tube without frame modifications)
- Parametrically designed - modeled size can be adjusted via one text file
- Minimize wasted space
- Low(ish) cost - compared to buying a large pre-built laser

## Safety

Though it can't turn anyone to stone like the Medusa of legends, to gaze upon this beast unprotected is extremely dangerous. High power lasers present some unique hazards. Compared to many CO2 lasers this one is relatively low power, yet still has the potential to cause **instant and permanent blindness**.

Additionally, since this laser light is columnated, the optical hazard does not significantly decrease with distance. This means that mindfulness of the safety of neighbors is required in addition to personal protection. I performed every test in my garage with the door fully closed and all occupants wearing protective goggles.

Though cheap laser goggles exist and I've seen many people on the internet claim that any polycarbonate safety glasses will do, I'm rather fond of my eyes and opted for glasses which carry proper optical ratings.

As always, you take responsibility for your own actions. I make no claims as the the safety of this design. I'm not an expert and may have significant errors in my assumptions and calculations.

## Construction Methodology

Everything about this design is based on 20mm aluminum extrusions. I specifically used V-slot extrusions so they could double as guides for the motion system in addition to providing structural rigidity.

I learned from building my [3D printer](https://jubilee3d.com/index.php?title=Main_Page) that hidden internal corner brackets are suboptimal and honestly just a pain to use except where absolutely necessary. For this reason (with a few exceptions) the whole chassis is built with cast aluminum corner brackets and M5x8mm button head screws.

<!--TODO: add frame images-->

Primarily due to the passthrough capability, this design is not  particularly rigid torsionally about the X axis (left to right). This could be a particularly problematic design flaw if it was somewhere that required being moved frequently. Because of this torsional weakness and to maintain consistent alignment between the IR cutting laser and visible guide laser, the rear portion of the chassis is loaded up with small cross-members to improve rigidity.

## Motion System

One particularly problematic issue was that of belt tensioning and ensuring reliability in the Y gantry. My original design had the belts contacting <90 degrees of the drive pulley which resulted in poor engagement even with reasonably tensioned belts and frequent slips. This is particularly problematic with a CO2 laser because the optics rely on constant angles to ensure the laser reaches the focusing lens at all.

<!--TODO: add image of original Y belt path-->


In the end, I sized this laser around some of the motion components. A 8mm x 1.5m hardened rod was difficult enough to find so the overall machine width was picked to just *barely* work without a longer rod.

<!--TODO: add images of rod ends-->

The vertical dimension was set by the length of some cheap and readily available lead screws. Longer options certainly do exist though I have no real need for additional Z work area.

## Electronics and Control

There isn't a whole lot to say about electronics on this project. I'm using a Ruida RDC6432G DSP controller, a 40W power supply designed for use with CO2 lasers, and COTS motors and controllers.

<!--TODO: add wiring diagram-->

<!--TODO: add cooling system images-->

## First Cuts



## Lessons Learned

Halfway through this project, I got frustrated by 3D printed parts not *quite* fitting as intended and went down a rabbit hole tuning my 3D printer. This was an excellent use of a couple evenings and completely transformed my experience from dialing in tolerances on every part over a few iterations to everything fitting perfectly on the first try. If you're interested in the process I used, check out [Ellis' print tuning guide](https://ellis3dp.com/Print-Tuning-Guide/).

<!--TODO: add before/after re-tuning pictures-->

I originally intended to build this system without a visible laser guide and add it later whenever I got around to it. That would have been a mistake. Aligning the visible laser to the glass tube only requires a couple test pulses and a few minutes of fiddling with a single optical component. Once the visible and invisible lasers are colinear, aligning the rest of the optics is a breeze since you can see a red dot move in real time rather than having to guess and check with an invisible and hazardous laser beam.

<!--TODO: add visible alignment laser pictures-->

Overall, this went together quite painlessly and was really easy to scale as my constraints evolved due to my initial commitment to parametric design. As it stands, it would be pretty trivial to scale this design down to a 50mm wide benchtop unit or up to a 2m wide behemoth.

## Resources

- [Git Repository](https://git.brendanhaines.com/brendanhaines/medusa)
- [Cheap (certified) laser goggles ](https://phillips-safety.com/product-category/laser/laser-safety-glasses/cd2/)
